OSSM-8934: Conceptual topic for cluster-wide migration (#88982)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-about-cluster-wide-migration.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:

// * service-mesh-docs-main/migrating/checklists/ossm-migrating-cluster-wide-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: Concept
[id="ossm-about-cluster-wide-migration_{context}"]
= About cluster-wide migration

> Migrating from {SMProductName} {SMv2Version} to {SMProduct} 3.0 can be performed using one of the following methods:

Reviewer: I would probably remove those methods and start with some more general overview in this chapter:

During the migration process, two cluster-wide control planes run in the same cluster while data plane namespaces are gradually migrated. One control plane is associated with the 2.6 installation and the other one is associated with the 3.0 installation. You must carefully plan out the migration steps in order to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes. Next chapters describe required conditions for successful migration.

* Applying the `istio.io/rev` label
* Applying the `istio-injection=enabled` label
* Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label; however, the simple migration method should not be used in a production environment because there will be traffic disruptions.

During the migration process, two cluster-wide control planes run in the same namespace. One control plane is associated with the 2.6 installation and the other one is associated with the 3.0 installation. You must carefully plan out the migration steps in order to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes.

== Control planes and root certificate

During the migration, the control plane associated with the 2.6 installation and the control plane associated with the 3.0 installation must share the same root certificate. This can be achieved by installing the 3.0 control plane to the same namespace as 2.6 control plane. The migration procedures show how to verify the root certificate is shared.

== Control planes, discovery selectors, and namespace access

> Both control planes must have access to all namespaces in the mesh. During the migration, some proxies will be controlled by the 3.0 control plane while other proxies will remain controlled by the 2.6 control plane. To ensure that mesh communication works during the migration, both control planes must be aware of the same set of services. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both control planes must have access to all namespaces in the mesh. During the migration, some proxies will be controlled by the 3.0 control plane while other proxies will remain controlled by the 2.6 control plane. To ensure that mesh communication works during the migration, both control planes must be aware of the same set of services. Service discovery is done by `istiod` component which is running in your control plane namespace.
```

> Discovery selectors specify the set of namespaces that comprise the mesh. If you are using discovery selectors, you must ensure that the `discoverySelectors` label defined in the {SMProduct} 3.0 {istio} resource match the namespaces that comprise the {SMProduct} 2.6 mesh. 
> 
> If the 2.6 control plane uses discovery selectors that were automatically generated by the control plane, such as `maistra.io/member-of` label, the labels are removed during the migration process. To use discovery selectors in the 3.0 installation you must apply new labels to the application namespaces. See "Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors" for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the {SMProduct} 3.0, you can control the service discovery via discovery selectors. If you are using discovery selectors, you must ensure that the `discoverySelectors` expression defined in the {SMProduct} 3.0 {istio} resource match the namespaces that comprise the {SMProduct} 2.6 mesh. You may need to add additional labels onto your OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 application namespaces to ensure that they are captured by your OpenShift Service Mesh 3.0. See "Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors" for more information.

Note that automatically created label `maistra.io/member-of` by {SMProduct} 2.6 can't be used as it will be removed during the migration.
```

Author: done

== Control planes and network policies

> During the migration, ensure that no network policies block the traffic between the `istiod` resource and the proxies for the two control planes. By default, {SMProduct} 2.6 manages network policies that block traffic to the 3.0 control plane. In the pre-migration checklist, you are instructed to disable the network policies. However, you can choose to manually re-create the network policies. The newly created network policies must allow traffic for both control planes. When a dataplane namespace is migrated to 3.0, the `maistra.io/member-of` label automatically gets removed. Use a different label in the network policies. See "Migration of Network Policies" for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the migration, ensure that no network policies block the traffic between the control plane and data plane namespaces and vice versa and between the data plane namespaces themselves. This must be assured for both control plane versions. By default, {SMProduct} 2.6 manages network policies that block traffic to the 3.0 control plane. In the pre-migration checklist, you are instructed to disable the network policies. However, you can choose to manually re-create the network policies. The newly created network policies must allow traffic for both control planes. When a dataplane namespace is migrated to 3.0, the `maistra.io/member-of` label automatically gets removed. Use a different label in the network policies. See "Migration of Network Policies" for more information.
```

[NOTE]
====
If network policies are configured incorrectly they can disrupt mesh traffic. When performing the migration, exercise caution when creating network policies to prevent traffic disruption. See "Network Policy migration" for more information.
====

== Control planes and sidecar injection

> During the migration, only one control plane will perform sidecar injection. This is achieved by correctly using injection labels. See "Installing the Sidecar" for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the migration, only one control plane must perform sidecar injection. This is achieved by correctly using injection labels. See "Installing the Sidecar" for more information.
```

Author: done

[NOTE]
====

> During the migration, you must disable 2.6 injector. In this documentation, examples use the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label to prevent the 2.6 control plane from injecting a proxy in the namespace, but your installation might use a different label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the migration, you must disable 2.6 injector. In this documentation, examples use the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label to prevent the 2.6 control plane from injecting a proxy in the namespace.
```

Reviewer: It's actually required to use this label.

====

If both control planes try to perform sidecar injection the proxy will not start and the migration cannot be completed.

== Control planes and label selection

For {SMProduct} 3.0, you must decide if you want to use the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label to configure sidecar injection. See "Installing the Sidecar" for more information about how to use the labels.

In the {SMProduct} 2.6 installation, the way member selection was configured in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource can impact how injection labels are used in the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation.

> By default, in a 2.6 installation, the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label. As a result, and all of the data plane namespaces in a 2.6 installation have the `istio-injection=enabled` label applied. If you are using the default 2.6 installation settings, you can either keep using that label or switch to the `istio.io/rev` label for the 3.0 installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, in a 2.6 installation, the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and all of the data plane namespaces in a 2.6 installation have the `istio-injection=enabled` label applied. If you are using the default 2.6 installation settings, you can either keep using that label or switch to the `istio.io/rev` label for the 3.0 installation.
```

Author: done

> If the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is not configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and the 2.6 data plane namespace uses a unique label you must either add the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label during the migration. In the {SMProduct} 3 installation, the labels defined in the `spec.memberSelectors` parameter of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource have no effect on sidecar injection and cannot be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is not configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and the 2.6 data plane namespace uses a custom label you must either add the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label during the migration. In the {SMProduct} 3 installation, the custom label defined in the `spec.memberSelectors` parameter of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource have no effect on sidecar injection and cannot be used.
```

> In the 2.6 installation, if projects were added to the mesh using the `ServiceMeshMember` resource you must add ether the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label to the project namespaces during the migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the 2.6 installation, if projects were added to the mesh by manually creating the `ServiceMeshMember` resource you must add ether the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label to the project namespaces during the migration.
```

Author: done

By default, in a 2.6 installation, the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and all of the data plane namespaces in a 2.6 installation have the `istio-injection=enabled` label applied. If you are using the default 2.6 installation settings, you can either keep using that label or switch to the `istio.io/rev` label for the 3.0 installation.

If the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is not configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and the 2.6 data plane namespace uses a custom label you must add the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label during the migration. The custom labels defined in the `spec.memberSelectors` parameter of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource have no effect on sidecar injection in the {SMProduct} 3 installation and cannot be used. 

In the 2.6 installation, if projects were added to the mesh by manually creating the `ServiceMeshMember` resource you must add the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label to the project namespaces during the migration.

== Cluster-Wide migration methods

> Migrating from {SMProductName} {SMv2Version} to {SMProduct} 3.0 can be performed using one of the following methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Understanding difference between the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` labels is important to be able to choose a correct migration method. It's recommended to read through all migration method before choosing one which fits your needs the most.
Migrating from {SMProductName} {SMv2Version} to {SMProduct} 3.0 can be performed using one of the following methods:
```

Author: done, I combined the edits.

* Applying the `istio.io/rev` label
* Applying the `istio-injection=enabled` label

> * Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label; however, the simple migration method should not be used in a production environment because there will be traffic disruptions.

Reviewer 2: nit: I don't think it's guaranteed there will be traffic disruptions so maybe we can soften the language here.
```suggestion
* Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label; however, the simple migration method should not be used in a production environment because there could be traffic disruptions.
```

Author: done

> * Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label; however, the simple migration method should not be used in a production environment because there could be traffic disruptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label; however, the simple migration method should not be used in a production environment because there could be traffic disruptions.

Please see all three procedures to understand differences.
```

Author: Done. I combined the edits.

// Module included in the following assemblies:

// * service-mesh-docs-main/migrating/checklists/ossm-migrating-cluster-wide-assembly.adoc

> :_mod-docs-content-type: Concept

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
```

Author: done

[id="ossm-about-cluster-wide-migration_{context}"]

> = About cluster-wide migration

Reviewer 3: For this title, maybe something along the lines of "Control plane configuration migration requirements" is more descriptive of the actual content below? Then you could potentially drop the repeated "Control planes" from all the subheadings.

Author: done

> During the migration process, two cluster-wide control planes run in the same cluster while the data plane namespaces are gradually migrated to the {SMProductName} 3.0 installation. One control plane is associated with the {SMProductName} {SMv2Version} installation and the other one is associated with the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation. You must carefully plan out the migration steps in order to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes. The following topics describe the required conditions for successful migration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the migration process, two cluster-wide control planes run in the same cluster while the data plane namespaces are gradually migrated to the {SMProductName} 3.0 installation. One control plane is associated with the {SMProductName} {SMv2Version} installation and the other is associated with the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation. You must carefully plan out the migration steps to avoid possible conflicts between the two control planes.
```

Reviewer 3: Also, this has `{SMv2Version}`, which renders to 2.6.6 currently, but the content below all has hardcoded `2.6`. Which one is better to use?

Author: The migration from service mesh 2.6 to 3.0 is very complicated. These are two different products - not merely a software bump. Gwynne and I talked through the migration workflows (Gwynne is working on multitenant and I'm working on cluster-wide) we thought it would be more effective to use 2.6 when referring to the general installation and use the variable when the actual version is more relevant to the specific context.

Reviewer 3: Ok, good deal - if the difference is intended and serving a purpose then SGTM :)

> == Control planes and root certificate

Reviewer 3: all subheading require anchor IDs w/a context variable

Author: done

> During the migration, the control plane associated with the 2.6 installation and the control plane associated with the 3.0 installation must share the same root certificate. This can be achieved by installing the 3.0 control plane to the same namespace as 2.6 control plane. The migration procedures show how to verify the root certificate is shared.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the migration, the control plane that is associated with the 2.6 installation and the control plane that is associated with the 3.0 installation must share a root certificate. This can be achieved by installing the 3.0 control plane into the same namespace as 2.6 control plane. The migration procedures show how to verify that the root certificate is shared.
```
or, as you use later:
```suggestion
During the migration, both control planes must share a root certificate. This can be achieved by installing the 3.0 control plane into the same namespace as 2.6 control plane. The migration procedures show how to verify that the root certificate is shared.
```

Author: done

== Control planes, discovery selectors, and namespace access

> Both control planes must have access to all namespaces in the mesh. During the migration, some proxies are controlled by the 3.0 control plane while other proxies remain controlled by the 2.6 control plane. To ensure that mesh communication works during the migration both control planes must be aware of the same set of services. Service discovery is provided by `istiod` component, which runs in the control plane namespace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both control planes must have access to all namespaces in the mesh. During the migration, some proxies are controlled by the 3.0 control plane while other proxies remain controlled by the 2.6 control plane. To ensure that mesh communication works during the migration, both control planes must be aware of the same set of services. Service discovery is provided by `istiod` component, which runs in the control plane namespace.
```

Author: done

> In the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation, you can control how {istio} discovers services using discovery selectors. When using discovery selectors, ensure that the `discoverySelectors` expression defined in the {SMProduct} 3.0 {istio} resource match the namespaces that comprise the {SMProduct} 2.6 mesh. You might have to add additional labels to the {SMProduct} 2.6 application namespaces to ensure that they are captured in the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation. See "Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors" for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation, you can control how {istio} discovers services by using discovery selectors. When using discovery selectors, ensure that the `discoverySelectors` expression that is defined in the {SMProduct} 3.0 {istio} resource matches the namespaces that comprise the {SMProduct} 2.6 mesh. You might have to add additional labels to the {SMProduct} 2.6 application namespaces to ensure that they are captured in the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation. For more information, see "Scoping the service mesh with DiscoverySelectors".
```

Should there be an xref somewhere after the module to the referenced doc?

Author: There is a huge push for 3.0 docs. Various PRs are in different stages and being merged at different times. We have a story to add xrefs after all the PRs get merged.

[NOTE]
====

> In {SMProduct} 2.6 installations, the `maistra.io/member-of` label is automatically created. This label automatically gets removed during the migration process so it cannot be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In {SMProduct} 2.6 installations, the `maistra.io/member-of` label is automatically created. This label cannot be used because it is automatically removed during the migration process.
```

Author: done

====

== Control planes and network policies

> During the migration, for both control planes, ensure that no network policies block traffic between the control plane and the data plane namespaces, between the data plane namespaces and the control plane, or between the data plane namespaces themselves. By default, {SMProduct} 2.6 manages network policies that block traffic to the 3.0 control plane. 

Reviewer 3: I would consider making the list in the first sentence a bulleted list - it's just a lot of info to try to keep in your head as you read a sentence.

Author: done

> In the pre-migration checklist, you are instructed to disable network policies. However, you can manually re-create them. Manually created network policies must allow traffic for both control planes. When a data plane namespace is migrated to 3.0, the `maistra.io/member-of` label automatically gets removed. Do not use this label in network policies. See "Migration of Network Policies" for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the premigration checklist, you are instructed to disable network policies. However, you can manually re-create them. Manually created network policies must allow traffic for both control planes. When a data plane namespace is migrated to 3.0, the `maistra.io/member-of` label is automatically removed. Do not use this label in network policies. For more information, see "Migration of Network Policies".
```
Should there be an xref somewhere after the module to the referenced doc?

Author: A separate story will address xrefs

[NOTE]
====

> If network policies are configured incorrectly they can disrupt mesh traffic. When performing the migration, exercise caution when creating network policies to prevent traffic disruption. See "Network Policy migration" for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Incorrectly configured network policies can disrupt mesh traffic. When performing the migration, exercise caution when creating network policies to prevent traffic disruption. For more information, see "Network Policy migration".
```

Should there be an xref somewhere after the module to the referenced doc?

Author: done

====

== Control planes and sidecar injection

> During the migration, only one control plane must perform sidecar injection. This is achieved by correctly using injection labels. See "Installing the Sidecar" for more information.
> 
> [NOTE]
> ====
> During the migration, you must disable the 2.6 injector. Use the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label to prevent the 2.6 control plane from injecting a proxy in the namespace.
> ====
> 
> If both control planes try to perform sidecar injection the proxy will not start and the migration cannot be completed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If both control planes try to perform sidecar injection the proxy will not start and the migration cannot be completed. To ensure that only one control plane performs sidecar injection during the migration, use injection labels. For more information, see "Installing the Sidecar".

[NOTE]
====
During the migration, you must disable the 2.6 injector. Use the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label to prevent the 2.6 control plane from injecting a proxy in the namespace.
====
```
Should there be an xref somewhere after the module to the referenced doc?

Author: done

== Control planes and label selection

> For {SMProduct} 3.0, you must decide if you want to use the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label to configure sidecar injection. See "Installing the Sidecar" for more information about how to use the labels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For {SMProduct} 3.0, you must decide if you want to use the `istio.io/rev` label or the `istio-injection` label to configure sidecar injection. For more information, see "Installing the Sidecar".
```

Author: done

> In the {SMProduct} 2.6 installation, the way member selection was configured in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource can impact how injection labels are used in the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the {SMProduct} 2.6 installation, the member selection configuration in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource can impact how injection labels are used in the {SMProduct} 3.0 installation.
```

Author: done

> By default, in a 2.6 installation, the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and all of the data plane namespaces in a 2.6 installation have the `istio-injection=enabled` label applied. If you are using the default 2.6 installation settings, you can either keep using that label or switch to the `istio.io/rev` label for the 3.0 installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, in a 2.6 installation, the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and all of the data plane namespaces in a 2.6 installation have the `istio-injection=enabled` label applied. If you are using the default 2.6 installation settings, you can keep using that label or switch to the `istio.io/rev` label for the 3.0 installation.
```

Author: done

> If the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is not configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and the 2.6 data plane namespace uses a custom label you must add the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label during the migration. The custom labels defined in the `spec.memberSelectors` parameter of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource have no effect on sidecar injection in the {SMProduct} 3 installation and cannot be used. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the `spec.memberSelectors` field in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource is not configured to match the `istio-injection=enabled` label and the 2.6 data plane namespace uses a custom label, you must add the `istio.io/rev` label or the `istio-injection` label during the migration. The custom labels defined in the `spec.memberSelectors` parameter of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` resource have no effect on sidecar injection in the {SMProduct} 3 installation and cannot be used. 
```

Author: done

> In the 2.6 installation, if projects were added to the mesh by manually creating the `ServiceMeshMember` resource you must add the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label to the project namespaces during the migration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If projects in the 2.6 installation were added to the mesh by manually creating the `ServiceMeshMember` resource, you must add the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` label to the project namespaces during the migration.
```

Author: done

> == Cluster-Wide migration methods

Reviewer 3: This subsection seems unrelated to the control plane topics above. It seems like a separate module.

Author: done

> == Cluster-Wide migration methods

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
== Cluster-wide migration methods
```

Author: done

> Migrating from {SMProductName} {SMv2Version} to {SMProduct} 3.0 can be performed using one of the following methods:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Migrating from {SMProductName} {SMv2Version} to {SMProduct} 3.0 can be performed by using one of the following methods:
```

Author: done

* Applying the `istio.io/rev` label
* Applying the `istio-injection=enabled` label

> * Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label; however, this method might introduce traffic disruptions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label; however, this method might introduce traffic disruptions
```
or possibly:
```suggestion
* Performing a simple migration using the `istio-injection=enabled` label
+
[NOTE]
====
This method might introduce traffic disruptions.
====
```

Author: done

> It is important to Understand the difference between the `istio.io/rev` or `istio-injection` labels in order to select the best migration method for your {SMProduct} installation. Read through all the migration methods before choosing the one that best fits your needs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To select the best migration method for your {SMProduct} installation, you must understand the difference between the `istio.io/rev` and `istio-injection` labels. Read through all the migration methods before choosing the one that best fits your needs.
```

Author: done
